---
title: "The GROWTH MINDSET demystified"
date: 2019-01-21T13:22:14+07:00
draft: false
type: "post"
tags: ["education", "growth mindset", "developers"]
---


I can't do it, I can't learn this, it's too hard, Come on, I'm just a Junior
Developer, WebPack is not my thing, I tried it and failed.

Those are the words of a developer drenched and soaked with imposter syndrome.

Over time we keep fighting ourselves, trying to run away from our shadows,
trying to find shortcuts, yes I did also, I really did :(

At a point in my life, I just felt some things were not meant for me, I felt
maths was too complex for me, JavaScript was not my thing!!

But come, what if I was wrong, what if maths is not complex? what if JavaScript
is not hard? what if I just had a FIXED MINDSET?

In this article, I would introduce you to the GROWTH MINDSET, what it means and
why you should care.

Let's get started!!

*****

### WHAT DOES THE GROWTH MINDSET MEAN?

> Carol Dweck is the Lewis & Virginia Eaton Professor of Psychology at Stanford
> University and the author of [Mindset: The New Psychology of
Success](http://www.amazon.com/Mindset-The-New-Psychology-Success/dp/1400062756)

> Over 30 years ago, [Dr Carol Dweck](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carol_Dweck)
> and her colleagues became interested in students' attitudes about failure. They
noticed that some students rebounded while other students seemed really
devastated by even the smallest setbacks.

> After studying this behaviour in a lot of children, Dr Dweck coined the terms
> **FIXED MINDSET** and **GROWTH MINDSET **to describe the underlying beliefs
people have about learning and intelligence.

According to the Harvard Business Review;

*To briefly sum up the findings: Individuals who believe their talents can be
developed (through hard work, good strategies, and input from others) have a
growth mindset. They tend to achieve more than those with a more fixed mindset
(those who believe their talents are innate gifts). This is because they worry
less about looking smart and they put more energy into learning.*

Now, **The Growth Mindset** simply means having the mindset that your talents,
skills or strength can be developed over time. It revolves around the belief
that you can improve intelligence, talents, ability and performance.

**The Fixed Mindset** on the other end is the opposite, it refers to the belief
that a person's talents are fixed and generated from birth. This revolves around
the idea that once you can't do something from the onset, it isn't meant for
you. Once you can't solve that arithmetic, you conclude that maths is not your
thing, once you can't figure out that algorithm, you conclude that programming
is hard.

Recent advances in neuroscience have shown us that the brain is far more
malleable than we ever knew. Research on brain plasticity has shown how
connectivity between neurons can change with experience. With practice, neural
networks grow new connections, strengthen existing ones, and builds insulation
that speeds transmission of impulses. These neuroscientific discoveries have
shown us that we can increase our neural growth by the actions we take, such as
using good strategies, consistency, asking questions, practising, and following
good nutrition and sleep habits.

Mark Zuckerberg was not born a geek, [Sarah
Drasner](https://medium.com/@sarah_edo) was not born a Developer Avocado, [Ire
Aderinokun](https://medium.com/@ireade) was not born a frontend developer,
[Prosper Otemuyiwa](https://medium.com/@unicodeveloper) was not born on a Senior
Level, they all started from somewhere, learning and Improving daily.

This is the Idea we should embrace as developers/designers, It is never easy and
accepting this fact is the beginning of you moving forward, but saying "NO I
CAN'T" kills it all.

> DO NOT ENTERTAIN THE IDEA OF HAVING FIXED TALENTS, IT DOES NOT WORK THAT WAY,
> SKILLS ARE IMPROVED, TALENTS ARE SHARPENED.

The fact that you are not getting it perfectly now, does not mean you should
quit, it only means you should be consistent and improve with practice and good
strategies.

The Growth Mindset is not focused on caring about success or achievements, but
rather learning. Learning is a process, you just need to keep moving!

> **When learning especially something new, the main goal should not be finishing
> but rather learning.**

*****

### Advantages of The Growth Mindset

The Growth Mindset is a very buzzing topic and research has shown how much
increase in success it has birthed after its evolution.

Here are some of the merits;

* It Improves and builds self-esteem, learning orientation and reduces
helplessness
* It reduces stress and aggression as well as increasing wellbeing and emotional
stability
* It promotes adaptability and coping skills and develops better self-regulation
* It Strengthens your Confidence and never makes you feel stupid while learning
* It lowers your risk of Depression

The list continues...

> "The growth mindset does allow people to love what they're doing and continue
> to love it in the face of difficulties, the growth mindset allows people to
value what they're doing regardless of the outcome." — Dr Dweck

Now, this is pretty much it, Plants don't grow and become fruitful once its seed
hit the ground, it takes a lot of weeding, watering, manuring and strategies to
make it grow.

This is how we operate as humans too, you need to undergo a lot of good
strategies and consistency to grow.


*****

### How do you build a Growth Mindset?

Truth be told, we all had fixed mindsets at some point in our lives, we probably
did not know it was called that, but we can build The GROWTH MINDSET.

What's the best way to get started with your growth mindset revolution? One way
is to identify where you may have a fixed mindset tendency in your life or
career so that you can work to become more growth minded.

We all live upon a continuum ( something that keeps on going, changing slowly
over time), and consistent self-assessment helps us become the person we want to
be.

<span class="figcaption_hack">Source: Mindsetworks</span>

Here are just a few ways to get over the Fixed Mindset and become Growth Minded:

* **See Setbacks As Feedbacks**

It's easy to be frustrated by setbacks. Yet they are *useful* because they
provide information in the form of feedback. A setback indicates that something
went wrong or rather something is missing and you now have the opportunity to
figure out *what went wrong* and *why*, *learn from it*, and *prevent it from
happening again.*

The growth mindset sees setbacks as useful, whereas a fixed mindset sees them as
annoying hurdles and cause motivation or effort to drop.

* **Stop trying to prove yourself always**

In a fixed mindset success and achievements is a top priority. You *always* want
to be measured by others, and you *always* want to be perfect. The very act of
'succeeding' requires that you show yourself to be better than others. So if you
focus on succeeding and 'achieving' things, you're always in a rush and your
focus would be diverted. In a growth mindset, you don't care about proving
yourself to others, you only care about improving, learning and growing.

* **Put more effort rather than running away**

If you're constantly interested in learning more and improving, then you should
put in more time and effort to do so.

* **Your company matters**

You should not hang out with folks with Fixed mindsets, In fact, hang out with
those who are more Growth minded than you, this way the check and balance you
when you feel lazy.

I don't move with lazy folks, [Leksy](https://medium.com/@ibolamilekan) is my
friend and each time I feel reluctant to learn something or want to quit because
I'm not getting it, he tells me *"See I can learn any new language today If my
next Job requires it, all you need is The Growth Mindset"*

* **Challenge yourself**

Learning is not an easy trade, you need to challenge yourself, pick up tasks you
don't know and work on getting them done. Spend more time doing stuff you don't
know and get better doing them repeatedly.

*****

Your mindset is the view you adopt of yourself whether your abilities and
characteristics can change, or whether they are set in stone, the decision is
all yours.

As developers, designers or whatever tech field you belong too; Learning is
something that never ends in your career, whatever you're running from, whatever
you want to learn, brace up, take your stance and decide to be Growth minded,
only you can make this decision.

Begin your journey of growth today!!

*****

Thank you for reading, If this helped you in any way, drop some comments and
let's hear your views.

Don't forget to clap and share :)


![thewebdev](https://res.cloudinary.com/iambeejayayo/image/upload/c_scale,w_100/v1547954566/fav-500.png)

# Subscribe for my Newsletter [here](https://eepurl.com/geCCfL) and get notified when I write something cool.